---
title: 'Basic Idea (part 03)'
status: draft
date: 2025-05-19T20:12:05-03:00
description: >
  xxxx
---

In *general topology*, we talk about *convergence* and *continuity*.


Continuity
----------

For *continuity* (on every point),
*open sets* are very easy to work with:
> $f$ is continuous iff $f^{-1}$ takes open sets to open sets.

In symbols:
$$f^{-1}(\tau) \subset \tau,$$
where $\tau$ is the family of *open sets*.

On the other hand,
talking about *continuity* in a point $x \in X$ using *open sets* is a bit ugly:
> The inverse image of an open set that contains $f(x)$ contains an open set that contains $x$.

Okay... in plain English it is uglier... let's try with some symbols:
> For $A \in \tau(f(x)))$, $f^{-1}(A)$ contains some $U \in \tau(f)$.

Still ugly...
but that's what happens when you use a specific basis of a filter.
The inverse image of a filter basis is, indeed, a filter basis.
It is just not exactly the particular basis you wished for. :facepalm:

As far as *continuity everywhere* is concerned,
we can talk about it without making references to points.
Well... of course,
the function $f$ we are dealing with does take **points** from $X$ and sends them to **points** in $Y$.

> How can we talk about continuous functions without the functions themselves?

Notice, however,
that $f^{-1}$ not only takes open sets to open sets.
It also takes neighbouhood filters $\mathcal{V}(f(x))$ to subfilters of $\mathcal{V}(x)$.
So, instead of talking about the **point** $x$, we could instead talk about $\mathcal{V}(x)$.
An important question arises:
> Without looking at the *points*, looking only at the open sets, their intersections (meets),
> their union (joins) and the inclusion order... all we need to talk about filters...
> without talking about the *points* those sets are made of...
> can we distinguish what filters correspond to $\mathcal{V}(x)$ for some unknown $x \in X$?

For example,
consider the filter $\mathscr{F}$, generated by the open intervals $\left(0, \frac{1}{n}\right)$.
That is,
$\mathscr{F}$ is composed by the sets that contain one of those intervals.
This filter is not a neighbouhood filter for any $x \in \mathcal{R}$.
It is actually true that $\mathcal{V}(0) \subset \mathscr{F}$.

Of course, $\mathscr{F}$ cannot be a neighbourhood filter,
because its intersection is empty.
The rule of the game is that we do have a *lattice*: the lattice of open sets.
We can talk about inclusion.
We can talk about arbitrary union, because union of open sets is open.
We can talk about finite intersections, because this also gives an open set.
However,
we do not talk about arbitrary intersections in this lattice.
We only talk about open sets, and this arbitrary intersection might not be one.

We do, however, talk about *arbitrary meets* (or *infimum*).
That is,
the greatest open set that is contained in this arbitrary intersection:
the interior of the intersection.
And both,
$\mathcal{V}(x)$ and $\mathscr{F}$ are such that their *meet* is the empty set.

We shall deal with the above question in a future post.


Convergence
-----------

We can talk about convergence using filters.
For example,
let $x_\lambda$ be a [net](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_(mathematics)).
The sets
$$F_\gamma = \{x_\lambda | \lambda \geq \gamma\}$$
generate a filter $\mathscr{F}$.
We say that $x_\lambda$ converges to $x$ when
$$\mathcal{V}(x) \subset \mathscr{F}.$$
We can extend this and talk about convergence of filters.
We say that $\mathscr{F}$ converges to $\mathscr{G}$ when
$$\mathscr{G} \subset \mathscr{F}.$$
Wow!!! That was simple!!! :sunglasses:

Again,
a question that remains is:
> How do we know a filter is in fact the neighbourhood filter of a point?


Functions Over The Families of Open Sets
----------------------------------------

Suppose we have a function, not from $X$ to $Y$...
a function that takes open sets of $Y$ and takes to open sets of $X$.
